\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header

@set version 7.0.0
@set update-date  3 August 2017
@set update-month August 2017

@setfilename neoleo.info
@settitle Neoleo @value{version}
@c make a command index:
@defcodeindex cm
@defindex fs
@c %**end of header

@clear smallbook

@c Play with some whitespace settings:
@tex
\global\chapheadingskip = 15pt plus 4pt minus 2pt
\global\secheadingskip = 12pt plus 3pt minus 2pt
\global\subsecheadingskip = 9pt plus 2pt minus 2pt
@end tex

@c Use smaller whitespace between paragraphs in the 8.5x11 format:
@ifclear smallbook
@tex
\global\parskip 6pt plus 1pt
@end tex
@end ifclear

@finalout

@ifinfo
This file documents Neoleo, the GNU spreadsheet.

This file is part of GNU Neoleo.

Copyright (C) 1993-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Neoleo
@subtitle The GNU Spreadsheet:  Version @value{version}
@subtitle Documentation: @value{update-month}

@c is this the Neoleo or documentation author(s)? Let's include everyone
@author Tom Lord, Kai Getrost, Steve Fisk, Danny Backx
@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@c Put it inside the titlepage to turn off headings:
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
675 Massachusetts Avenue, @*
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA @*
@c Printed copies are available for $15 each.@*
@c ISBN-1882114-12-4

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node   Top, Basics, (dir), (dir)
@top Neoleo

Neoleo is the GNU spreadsheet program.  This documentation is of Neoleo
version @value{version}, as of @w{@value{update-date}.}  It is by no
means complete, nor necessarily accurate for that matter.

@menu
* Quickstart::
* Basics::                      
* How to enter data::           
* Making changes::              
* Style::                       
* Multiple Windows::            
* Options::                     
* Printing and Plotting::       
* Headless Mode::
* Examples and Utilities::
* Macros::                      
* Programs::                    
* Keymaps::                     
* Functions::                   
* Extending Neoleo::
* Reporting Bugs::
* Database Access::
* Key Index::
* Command Index::
* Function Index::
* Options Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu

@c @include running.texi

@node Quickstart, Basics, Top, Top
@include quickstart.texi

@node Basics, How to enter data,Quickstart, Top
@include basics.texi

@include entering-data.texi
@include making-changes.texi
@include style.texi
@include windows.texi
@include options.texi
@include print-plot.texi

@node Headless Mode, Examples and Utilities, Printing and Plotting, Top
@include headless.texi

@include examples.texi
@include macros.texi
@include programs.texi
@include keymaps.texi

@node   Functions, Extending Neoleo, Keymaps, Top
@include functions.texi

@node Extending Neoleo, Reporting Bugs, Functions, Top
@include interface.texi

@node Reporting Bugs, Database Access, Extending Neoleo, Top
@include bugs.texi

@node Database Access, , Reporting Bugs, Top
@include dbms.texi

@page
@node   Key Index, Command Index, Top, Top
@unnumbered Key Index
@printindex ky

@node   Command Index, Function Index, Key Index, Top
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex cm

@node   Function Index, Options Index, Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Function Index
@printindex fn

@c There aren't any builtin variables yet:
@node   Options Index, Concept Index, Function Index, Top
@unnumbered Options Index
@printindex vr

@node   Concept Index,  , Options Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@contents
@bye


@c Conventions

@c         options(variables)              vrindex
@c         commands                        cmindex
@c         keys                            kyindex
@c         functions(@things)              fnindex
@c         concepts                        cpindex
