@node Options, Printing and Plotting, Multiple Windows, Top
@chapter Options
@cindex Options

@ifhtml
<A NAME="HelpOptions">
@end ifhtml

Oleo has various options.  They can be set as a default in the
@file{.oleorc} file, or using the command @code{M-x set-option}.
To see all the current options, type @code{C-h o}.



@menu
* Appearance::                  Changing Oleo's appearance
* Window Options::              Options for the active window
* Other Options::               Other Options
@end menu

@node Appearance, Window Options, Options, Options
@section Changing Oleo's appearance

@table @code
@item a0
@vindex  a0
In a0 mode, Oleo uses @{letters@}@{digits@} style cell-references,
like some popular spreadsheets.

@item noa0
@vindex  noa0
In noa0 mode, Oleo uses R@{digits@}C@{digits@} style references,
like some other popular spreadsheets.  (@code{Default})

@item status
@vindex  status (number)
This option controls which line on the screen is used for
displaying the status of the current cell.  The number may be
positive, (counting down from the top), negative (counting up
from the bottom, or zero (disabling the status line).
(@code{Default=2})

@item input
@vindex  input (number)	
This option controls which line on the screen is used for
reading lines of text.  The number may be positive (counting
down from the top), or negative (counting up from the
bottom), but not zero.
(@code{Default=1})

@item edges	
@vindex  edges	
In edges mode Oleo displays row and column numbers at the top
and left edges of the window. (@code{Default})

@item noedges 
@vindex  noedges 
Row and column numbers are not displayed.

@item standout	
@vindex  standout	
In standout mode, the edges  are drawn in
standout mode (reverse video, usually). (@code{Default})

@item nostandout
@vindex  nostandout
        Edges are not drawn in standout mode.

@item list (CH)
@vindex  list 
Use the character CH to separate the cell values.  To set
the separator to, for instance, a comma, enter:
@example
M-x set-option RET list ,
@end example
To set it to a control character, e.g., @code{^I} (@key{TAB}, the default),
enter:
@example
M-x set-option RET list \11
@end example
The number to be used is the octal ASCII value of the desired control
character.  Note that the separator could also be set to, e.g., the
letter @code{z}.  Note that every separator is significant, i.e. a string
of spaces will cause multiple blank cells to be entered into the current row.
To get around this, use the handy unix utility tr(1), for example, to
preprocess your data file.

To retrieve a file which uses some separator, @code{s}, be sure the filename
has the suffix @code{.list} on it, start oleo, set the file type to list and
the separator to @code{s} (@code{M-x set-option RET file list RET}, and then
@code{M-x set-option RET list s RET}), and then read in the file.  This is what
would need to be done if, e.g., the letter @code{z} were used as a separator.
However, there are at least 2 cases where these options don't need to be set:
if the file uses (1) a comma or (2) a tab as a separator, then if the filename
has the suffix (1) @code{.csv} or (2) @code{.list}, then it will be read in
without having to set the options.  Note that if the file is then saved, it
will be saved in oleo format, so to read it back in properly, the suffix will
need to be removed or changed to @code{.oleo}.

@end table

@node Window Options, Other Options, Appearance, Options
@section Options for the active window

The following options affect the currently active window:

@table @code 

@item page
@vindex  page
In page mode, whenever a particular cell is
displayed in the window, it will always be in the same
location on the screen.  In page mode, the recenter command
acts just like the redraw-screen command.
@item nopage 
@vindex  nopage 
Turns off page mode.

@item pageh
@vindex  pageh
Turns on  page mode only in the horizontal direction.

@item nopageh	 
@vindex  nopageh	 
Turns off  page mode only in the horizontal direction.

@item pagev
@vindex  pagev
Turns on  page mode only in the vertical direction.

@item nopageh	
@vindex  nopageh	
 Turns off  page mode only in the vertical direction.

@item link 
@vindex  link (wnum)
This option 'links' the current window with the one
specified.  A window may only be linked to one other window
at a time.  When a window is linked to another one, whenever
the cell cursor in the first window is moved, the cursor in
the other window moves as well.  (unless the cursor in other
window is locked from moving in that direction.)

@item nolink
@vindex  nolink
@itemx unlink
@vindex unlink
This removes the link (if any) on the current window.

@item lockh  
@vindex  lockh  
Prevent the cell cursor in the current window
from moving in the horizontal direction, but only
when the cell cursor is moved in a window that this one is
linked.

@item nolockh
@vindex  nolockh
        Disable horizontal locking

@item lockv  
@vindex  lockv  
Prevent the cell cursor in the current window
from moving in the vertical direction, but only
when the cell cursor is moved in a window that this one is
linked.

@item nolockv
@vindex  nolockv
        Disable vertical locking

@end table

@node Other Options,  , Window Options, Options
@section Other Options

@table @code

@item auto
@vindex  auto
In auto mode, cells whose values may have changed are
automatically recalculated.  (@code{Default})


@item noauto
@vindex  noauto
In noauto mode, cells are only
recalculated when the recalculate command is used.

@item bkgrnd	
@vindex  bkgrnd	
@itemx background
@vindex background
In background mode, automatic recalculation is done while
the spreadsheet waits for you to type a key (and stops while
the key is being handled).  (@code{Default})


@item nobkgrnd
@vindex  nobkgrnd
@itemx nobackground
@vindex nobackground
In nobackground mode, Oleo
performs all its recalculation before listening for
keystrokes. 

@item backup
@vindex  backup
In backup mode, whenever the spreadsheet writes out a file,
if the file already exists, a backup copy is made (like
emacs). (@code{Default})

@item nobackup 
@vindex  nobackup 
        A backup copy is not made.

@item bkup_copy
@vindex  bkup_copy
In bkup_copy mode, backup files are made by copying the original file,
instead of renaming it.

@item nobkup_copy
@vindex  nobkup_copy
In nobackup mode bkup_copy is ignored. (@code{Default})

@item ticks
@vindex  ticks (number)
This value controls how often should rnd(), cell(), my(),
curcell(), etc. cells get updated.  This value is in
seconds.  The initial value is 1, meaning once every
second.


@item print
@vindex  print (number)
This is the width of the page for the print command.  The
initial value is the width of the screen.

@item file (format-name)
@vindex  file (format-name) 
Select the file format to use.  The argument @var{format-name}
must be one of oleo, sylk, sylk-noa0, sc, or list.
Note that if -DUSE_DLD was defined, format-name may be any .o file
that contains definitions for the appropriate functions, which will
be dynamically linked with the running oleo.

@item load (file-name) 
@vindex  load (file-name) 
This option is only avaliable if Oleo was compiled with
-DUSE_DLD.  This option loads in a .o file of spreadsheet
functions, keyboard commands, and/or keymaps.  Spreadsheet
functions and keyboard commands must be loaded in before they
can be used in expressions or bound to keys.

@end table

