@node Motif, Database Access, Reporting Bugs, Top
@chapter A Motif Graphical User Interface for Oleo

@menu
* Motif Introduction::
* LessTif::
* Advantages::
* What you need::
* Alternatives::
* Using the mouse::
* Using the keyboard shortcuts::
* Using Help::
* Fallback::
* Motif Buttons in a Spreadsheet Cell::
@end menu

@node Motif Introduction, LessTif, , Motif
@section Motif Introduction

Motif is a toolkit for building graphical user interfaces (GUIs)
with the X Window System.

Such a GUI has been built for oleo.
The combination of oleo and its Motif interface
comes close to professional quality spreadsheets
that one can buy off the shelf.

@node LessTif, Advantages, Motif Introduction, Motif
@section LessTif

When this manual talks about Motif,
it refers to what is commonly referred to as OSF/Motif,
a user interface toolkit for the X Window System which was
originally developped by the Open Software Foundation (OSF).
The OSF has merged with X/Open,
the new name of the organisation is The Open Group.

A free implementation of Motif, called LessTif,
which is available from
@uref{http://www.lesstif.org, the LessTif home page},
can be used instead of Motif.

LessTif is covered by the LGPL (Library General Public License).

@node Advantages, What you need, LessTif, Motif
@section Advantages

Advantages to using either the Motif or the GTK interface to Oleo
are the same as for any GUI: users with little experience will find
it easier to get started with the application.
The GUI interfaces also happen to be more aesthetically pleasing.

@node What you need, Alternatives, Advantages, Motif
@section What you need

A user of Oleo typically only needs a recent Oleo distribution,
which he installs through his operating system's standard mechanism.

Someone who's building Oleo from sources will need several packages
that Oleo depends on :
@itemize @bullet
@item Xbae widgets
@url{http://www.lesstif.org}
@url{ftp://ftp.lesstif.org/pub/hungry/lesstif/srcdist}
@item XmHTML
@url{http://www.xs4all.nl/~ripley/XmHTML}
@item GNU plotutils
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/plotutils/plotutils.html}
@item Motif or LessTif
@url{http://www.opengroup.org}
@url{http://www.lesstif.org}
@item GNU gettext
@url{http://www.gnu.org}
@item GNU texinfo (3.12 or later)
@url{http://www.gnu.org}
@end itemize

@node Alternatives, Using the mouse, What you need, Motif
@section Alternatives

Another toolkit for building GUIs is GTK.
It is also freely available,
and another user interface for oleo may be built with it too.

GTK is the FSF's official GUI toolkit.

@node Using the mouse, Using the keyboard shortcuts, Alternatives, Motif
@section Using the mouse

The mouse is used in the same manner as in any Motif application.

The top of the Oleo window is a horizontal bar which is called the menu bar.
It consists of a small number of buttons
(represented by words such as File, Edit, ...).

Using the mouse to point at such a word, you can click MB1
on such a button to make a pulldown menu appear.
MB1 is usually the left mouse button.

The words in these pulldown menus are action buttons which should perform
actions that the user can understand.

You can select a cell in the spreadsheet by clicking MB1 in it.
Once a cell is selected, its position and current value are displayed
in a status area in the upper left of the Oleo window
(just below the menu bar).
The area to the right of that is the formula editor:
it displays the formula on this cell, if any.

Formulas should be edited in the formula editor.

@node Using the keyboard shortcuts, Using Help, Using the mouse, Motif
@section Using the keyboard shortcuts

Using the method described above you can pull down a menu which reveals
a number of action buttons. These buttons typically contain a text such
as @code{Open   Ctrl-O}.

Additionally, the O is underlined.

The Ctrl-O means that you can press down the Control key on your keyboard,
and while doing that, depress the O key. This should activate the button.

The underlining means that once you've pulled down this menu,
you should be able to activate this button by just the O key.

The pulldown menu, which was indicated by the word File (with underlined F),
can in itself be triggered by pressing the Alt key and depressing the F key.

@node Using Help, Fallback, Using the keyboard shortcuts, Motif
@section Using Help



@node Fallback, Motif Buttons in a Spreadsheet Cell, Using Help, Motif
@section Fallback

If you have a version of oleo that has been built with Motif support,
but you don't currently have an X Window System display
(for instance you're using a dialup connection),
then it is still possible to use the curses based character user interface.

The command @code{oleo -t} should start Oleo with a curses based user interface,
even if you're running in an X environment.

@node Motif Buttons in a Spreadsheet Cell, , Fallback, Motif
@section Motif Buttons in a Spreadsheet Cell

You can put a button in a cell in the Motif version.
The formula of the cell that you want to have a button should be
@code{@ button("text", "cell-specification")}

The first argument is the text that the button will show, the second argument
is the cell whose content will be executed. That cell will typically contain a
command like @code{psprint-region r3:45c8:13 invoice.ps}

Note that this is currently an experimental feature.
